Genetic analysis of Japanese patients with persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy: nucleotide-binding fold-2 mutation impairs cooperative binding of adenine nucleotides to sulfonylurea receptor 1.

Authors: 
Tanizawa Y, Matsuda K, Matsuo M, Ohta Y, Ochi N, Adachi M, Koga M, Mizuno S, Kajita M, Tanaka Y, Tachibana K, Inoue H, Furukawa S, Amachi T, Ueda K, Oka Y

To elucidate the genetic etiology of persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (PHHI) in the Japanese population, we conducted a polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis of the sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) and Kir6.2 genes in 17 Japanese PHHI patients, including a pair of siblings from a consanguineous family. We also analyzed the glutamate dehydrogenase gene for the exons encoding an allosteric regulatory domain of the enzyme. In the SUR1 gene, we identified one frameshift (I446fsdelT) and two missense (R1420C, R1436Q) mutations. None of these mutations were found in control Japanese subjects. Siblings homozygous for the R1420C mutation had a mild form, whereas two patients heterozygous for the I446fsdelT and R1436Q mutations, respectively, exhibited a severe form of PHHI. Functional consequences of these mutations on K(ATP) function were evaluated using 86Rb+ efflux studies in COS-7 cells. SUR1-446fsdelT and SUR1-1436Q did not form a functional K(ATP). Western blot analysis after transient expression in COS-7 cells revealed the expression of SUR1-1436Q protein to be markedly reduced, suggesting SUR1-1436Q to be unstable in these cells. K(ATP)(SUR1-1420C) showed reduced responses to metabolic inhibition by oligomycin and 2-deoxyglucose. K(ATP) channels are under complex regulation by intracellular ATP and ADP. ATP both inhibits and activates these channels. The inhibition is probably mediated through direct ATP interaction with a pore-forming subunit Kir6.2, whereas the activation is likely to be through a regulatory subunit SUR1. There is a cooperative regulation of ATP and ADP binding to SUR1, and this cooperativity may be involved in regulating the K(ATP) channel. In SUR1-1420C, high-affinity binding of ATP to the nucleotide-binding fold (NBF)-1 was indistinguishable from that of wild-type SUR1. However, stabilization of ATP binding to NBF-1 by MgATP or MgADP was impaired, suggesting that this defect may account for impaired K(ATP)(SUR1-1420C) function. This is the first direct biochemical evidence that the cooperativity of nucleotide binding to SUR1 is impaired in a SUR1 mutant causing PHHI. No mutations were identified in the Kir6.2 and glutamate dehydrogenase genes. The genetic etiology of PHHI appears to be heterogeneous. SUR1 mutations may account for no more than 20% of PHHI cases in Japanese patients. Mutations of Kir6.2 and glutamate dehydrogenase genes are likely to be even less common.
