Two novel mutations in the lipoprotein lipase gene in a family with marked hypertriglyceridemia in heterozygous carriers. Potential interaction with the polymorphic marker D1S104 on chromosome 1q21-q23.

Authors: 
Hölzl B, Kraft HG, Wiebusch H, Sandhofer A, Patsch J, Sandhofer F, Paulweber B

Two novel mutations in the lipoprotein lipase (LPL) gene are described in an Austrian family: a splice site mutation in intron 1 (3 bp deletion of nucleotides -2 to -4) which results in skipping of exon 2, and a missense mutation in exon 5 which causes an asparagine for histidine substitution in codon 183 and complete loss of enzyme activity. A 5-year-old boy who exhibited all the clinical features of primary hyperchylomicronemia was a compound heterozygote for these two mutations. Nine other family members were investigated: seven were heterozygotes for the splice site mutation, one was a heterozygote for the missense mutation, and one had two wild-type alleles of the LPL gene. LPL activity in the post-heparin plasma of the heterozygotes was reduced to 49;-79% of the mean observed in normal individuals. Two of the heterozygotes had extremely high plasma triglyceride levels; in three of the other heterozygotes the plasma triglycerides were also elevated. As plasma triglycerides in carriers of one defective LPL allele can be normal or elevated, the heterozygotes of this family have been studied for a possible additional cause of the expression of hypertriglyceridemia in these subjects. Body mass index, insulin resistance, mutations in other candidate genes (Asn291Ser and Asp9Asn in the LPL gene, apoE isoforms, polymorphisms in the apoA-II gene and in the apoAI-CIII-AIV gene cluster, and in the IRS-1 gene) could be ruled out as possible factors contributing to the expression of hypertriglyceridemia in this family. A linkage analysis using the allelic marker D1S104 on chromosome 1q21;-q23 suggested that a gene in this region could play a role in the expression of hypertriglyceridemia in the heterozygous carriers of this family, but the evidence was not sufficiently strong to prove this assumption. Nevertheless, this polymorphic marker seems to be a good candidate for further studies.
